>> Brian Holt: Welcome back, and
congratulations, you've survived so far.
You deserve a merit badge of some sort.
Lastly, we're gonna do one
last sort called a radix sort.
This is a very different sort than
what we've been looking at previously.
It's called a non-comparator sort.
So it isn't n log n.
It can't be [COUGH] anything like that.
In fact, something that's interesting
about comparators versus anything else, is
when you're doing comparisons, the reason
why something is n squared is because
I'm taking one item and I'm comparing
it to every other item in the array.
That's what makes an n squared sort.
If something is n login, it looks at
every item at least once in the array,
which is where the n comes from.
Mathematically, that must happen.
And then I'm only comparing it
against some other items in the array,
using that to make assumptions,
that if this item is bigger than this one,
then it's definitely
bigger than the other one.
Using those mathematical properties
to only make some comparisons.
They've proven that
using comparator sorts,
that the fasted you can go is n log n.
It's mathematically
impossible to go any faster.
Everything else is just
making the coefficients.
You're only doing slightly less
instructions, but you still have to do
the same amount of comparisons or at
least there is an absolute floor to that.
Radic sort is quite different in that,
it doesn't actually make any comparisons.
It's never comparing one
thing versus the other.
It's doing some different some
orthogonal sorta thing that makes it so
that you can actually go faster
in certain circumstances.
Now, I'm gonna show you the more
simple way of doing this but
you can actually get this to go even
faster than what I'm going to show you.
So first thing you must be asking is like,
how do you faster versus how do you sort
something but never comparing anything.
And it's kind of
an interesting methodology.
Something that I would have never
thought of but let's chat about it.
So assume that we have
an array that looks like this.
10, 1, 52, 102, 33, 45, 6, 18 and 9.
What we're going to do is we're
going to create 10 queues.
You're probably sick about
hearing about queues by now but
deal with it you have
one more to deal with.
I'm then going to un unqueue
each one of these items
in 1 of 10 different queues
based on solely the 1 place.
So let's look down here at this little
example right here that I have in
the documentation.
So I'm going to create ten queues,
one for each number that is possible.
0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
And I'm going to unqueue each one
of those based on solely the ones
place in each one of these queues.
So this 1's gonna go in the 9 queue and
these 2 are going to go in the 7 queue.
And they just go in in the same order
that they're in the array already.
Once I've unqueued all of those then I'm
going to dequeue all of them in order so
they're gonna come back out as just
like you see here 347, 457 and 359.
It's the same order but I did the 7's
first and then I did the 9's.
Does that make sense?
So actually if you look at this,
it is sorted by the ones place.
If you just ignore the rest of the number,
it is sorta based on it,
cuz you have 7, 7, 9.
I'm then gonna go through and
unqueue these based on just the tens
places, ignoring the ones place.
Ignoring everything to the left and just
unqueue everything, this one's going to go
in fours, this one's going to go fives,
this one's going to go in fives.
Then I unqueue those into those and
then I'm going to dequeue, again,
them in order.
So that's actually ends up being the same
order, but I dequeue them in that order.
So 4, 7, 5, 9 and 5, 7.
If you look at this, ignoring
the 100s place, they are in order.
47, 59 and
57.
Why did this get out of order?
This isn't correct.
Let's go in reverse, anyway,
I assure you it will be in order.
Lastly, you go through,
it's because I'm one step ahead of this so
47, 57 and 59,
that's what I was getting mixed up about.
So 47, 57, 59, it's not in order
cuz of the hundreds are different.
But I'm gonna do the same thing
with the hundreds place and
once I've done that then it's 347,
359 and 457.
So at that point,
once I've done it based on the 100s
then it just comes out in order.
So that's more or less what's kinda
happening, is like put the ones in order,
put the 10s in order,
put the 100s in order.
And because you're going
in that particular order,
everything comes out in order.
Is that following, does that make sense?
>> Speaker 2: So
it depends on how many places you have,
how many times it'll take to sort it?
>> Brian Holt: Right,
so the first thing you
need to do is you need to go through and
find the longest number.
And that's how many
iterations you're gonna have.
So let's say this was 1,457,
you would have an extra iteration and
these ones would just go in the 0 bucket.
Does that make sense?
Cool.
There's all sorts of micro-optimizations
that you could do to get this to go
even faster, but we're just gonna
do radix sort to completion.
That's kind of the gist of
what we're gonna do here.
And that's the whole algorithm.
It's just unqueueing and
dequeueing things based on buckets.
So the more buckets you can have,
the faster this algorithm can go which
is why it's doing this in binary it's
actually faster than doing it in
decimal which is what we're gonna do.
We're still gonna do it in decimal
because I don't wanna teach
binary on top of radix.
So I'm gonna give you a second to
>> Speaker 3: Binary's faster,
but you said more buckets is faster.
>> Brian Holt: I guess more iterations,
more iterations upon the buckets.
Because you can have longer and
longer numbers.
>> Speaker 3: Okay.
>> Brian Holt: Yeah.
That's a good clarification, for sure.
So that's what we're gonna do here.
You could implement it in
terms of binary if you like.
And you can call snapshot to see what this
actually looks like on implementation.
I'll give you a shot now to go do that.